.Dd January 15, 2011
.Dt EZJAIL.CONF 5 USD
.Os FreeBSD
.Sh NAME
.Pa ezjail.conf
.Nd configuration file for ezjail script
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The file
.Pa ezjail.conf
contains settings that control the operation of the ezjail rc script. It is 
also read by the
.Cm ezjail-admin
utility to figure out where it should perform its actions. Its path is
set at installation time to
.Pa EZJAIL_PREFIX/etc/ezjail.conf ,
with an example file installed at
.Pa EZJAIL_PREFIX/etc/ezjail.conf.sample .
.Pp
This file is really a shell script that is sourced by the
.Cm ezjail-admin
command at run-time.
.Dq (str)
denotes a string; it should be enclosed in quotes if it contains space.
.Dq (bool)
notes a boolean, whose possible values are
.Dq YES
and
.Dq NO .
.Sh PATH OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width option
.It ezjail_jaildir (str)
Location of jail root directories.
.br
Default:
.Em /usr/jails .
.It ezjail_jailtemplate (str)
Location of template jail used to create a new jail
.br
Default:
.Em ${ezjail_jaildir}/newjail .
.It ezjail_jailbase (str)
Location of base jail, the one that is mounted to all jails
.br
Default:
.Em ${ezjail_jaildir}/basejail .
.It ezjail_sourcetree (str)
Location of your copy of FreeBSD's source tree (refer to the
.Xr ezjail-admin 1
utility for more information).
.br
Default:
.Em /usr/src .
.It ezjail_flavours_dir (str)
Location of the flavours, where each directory is a different flavour.
.br
Default:
.Em ${ezjail_jaildir}/flavours .
.It ezjail_portscvsroot (str)
CVS root to use when checking out or updating the ports tree in base jail.
.br
Default:
.Em :pserver:anoncvs@anoncvs.FreeBSD.org:/home/ncvs .
.It ezjail_ftphost (str)
This is where the install subcommand defaults to fetch its packages from.
.br
Default:
.Em ftp.freebsd.org .
.It ezjail_archivedir (str)
This is the default archive location for the
.Cm ezjail-admin archive
command.
.br
Default:
.Em ${ezjail_jaildir}/ezjail_archives .
.El
.Sh JAIL ADMIN OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width option
.It ezjail_default_execute (str)
This is the default command executed in a jail by
.Cm ezjail-admin console .
.br
Default:
.Em /usr/bin/login -f root .
.It ezjail_exec_start (str)
The command to execute in a jail when starting it.
.br
Default:
.Em /bin/sh /etc/rc .
.El
.Sh JAIL CREATION OPTIONS
Default options for newly created jails. Used by the
.Xr ezjail-admin 1
utility. Be careful about disabling
.Em ezjail_mount_enable .
.Bl -tag -width option
.It ezjail_mount_enable (bool)
Controls whether
.Pa /etc/fstab. Ar hostname
should be executed at jail startup time.
.br
Default: 
.Em YES .
.It ezjail_devfs_enable (bool)
Controls whether newly created jails are given a working
.Pa /dev
directory. (Refer to
.Xr devfs 5
and
.Xr jail 8
for more information).
.br
Default:
.Em YES .
.It ezjail_devfs_ruleset (str)
Specifies which devfs ruleset should apply for newly created jails.
(Refer to
.Xr devfs 5
and
.Xr jail 8
for more information).
.br
Default:
.Em devfsrules_jail .
.It ezjail_procfs_enable (bool)
Controls whether newly created jails are given a working
.Pa /proc
directory. (Refer to
.Xr procfs 5
and
.Xr jail (8)
for more information).
.br
Default:
.Em YES .
.It ezjail_fdescfs_enable (bool)
Controls whether newly created jails are given a working
.Pa /dev/fd/
directory. (Refer to
.Xr fdescfs (5)
and
.Xr jail (8)
for more information).
.br
Default:
.Em YES .
.It ezjail_uglyperlhack (bool)
Set to YES, if ezjail should provide a soft link from
.Pa /usr/bin/perl
to
.Pa /usr/local/bin/perl
in base jail.
.br
Default:
.Em YES .
.It ezjail_default_flavour (str)
Controls which flavours should be used for newly created jails if none
are given on the command line.
.br
Default:
.Em none .
.It ezjail_imagetype (one of simple, bde, eli, zfs)
Type of jail to create when creating a jail with the
.Fl i
flag without specifying the type explicitely.
.br
Default:
.Em simple
.El
.Sh ZFS OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width option
.It ezjail_use_zfs (bool)
Set to YES, if ezjail should manage basejail and newjail in a seperate
ZFS-datasets.
.br
Default:
.Em NO .
.It ezjail_jailzfs (str)
The name of the parent ZFS-dataset which ezjail will use to create
jails on. It will be mounted in
.Em ezjail_jaildir .
Setting this will automaticly enable ezjail managing jails in seperate
ZFS-datasets.
.br
Default:
.Em none .
.It ezjail_zfs_properties (str)
Default properties ZFS will use for creating datasets. See
.Xr zfs 1m
for details. ADVANCED, be very careful!
.br
Default:
.Em none .
.El
.Sh FILES
EZJAIL_PREFIX/etc/ezjail.conf
.br
EZJAIL_PREFIX/etc/rc.d/ezjail.sh
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ezjail-admin 1 ,
.Xr ezjail 5 ,
.Xr jail 8 ,
.Xr devfs 5 ,
.Xr fdescfs 5 ,
.Xr procfs 5 .
.Sh AUTHOR
Dirk Engling
.Aq erdgeist@erdgeist.org .
