.Dd January 15, 2011
.Dt EZJAIL-ADMIN 8 USD
.Os FreeBSD
.Sh NAME
.Nm ezjail-admin
.Nd Administrate ezjail environment 
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm Cm install
.Op Fl mMpPsS
.Op Fl h Ar host
.Op Fl r Ar release
.Nm
.Cm create
.Op Fl bx
.Op Fl f Ar flavour
.Op Fl r Ar jailroot
.Op Fl a Ar archive
.Op Fl c Ar jailtype Fl s Ar imagesize Op Fl C Ar attachargs
.Bk -words
.Ar jailname ipaddress Ns Op Ar ,ipaddress2,...
.Ek
.Nm
.Cm console
.Op Fl f
.Op Fl e Ar command
.Ar jailname
.Nm
.Cm list
.Nm
.Cm start | stop | restart | cryptostart Ar jailname...
.Nm
.Cm config
.Op Fl r Ar run | norun
.Op Fl n Ar newname
.Op Fl i Ar attach | detach | fsck
.Op Fl z Ar newdataset
.Op Fl c Ar newcpuset
.Op Fl f Ar newfib
.Ar jailname
.Nm
.Cm delete
.Op Fl wf
.Ar jailname
.Nm
.Cm archive
.Op Fl Af
.Op Fl a Ar archive
.Op Fl d Ar archivedir
.Ar jailname...
.Nm
.Cm restore
.Op Fl f
.Op Fl d Ar archivedir
.Ar archive | jailname...
.Nm
.Cm update
.Op Fl s Ar sourcetree | sourceosversion
.Op Fl p
.Fl b | Fl i | Fl P | Fl u | Fl U
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility is used to manage the ezjail environment and all the jails inside the
ezjail scope. This man page describes the invocation of
.Nm .
Refer to
.Xr ezjail 7
in order to get an introduction to the usage of ezjail, as well as
usage examples.
.Pp
The description of some options ends with
.Sq Variable: Dq Li $ezjail_abcd .
This means that the default value of the option may be overridden by setting
this variable in
.Xr ezjail.conf 5 .
.Ss Nm Cm install
This function sub-command is normally run once in the life of the ezjail
environment. It allocates the directory structure used by ezjail and populates
the base jail using the minimal distribution set from a FreeBSD FTP server.
.Pp
The default location for ezjail's basejail is in
.Pa /usr/jails ,
so be sure you have enough space there (a FreeBSD base release without man
pages, sources and ports is around 120MB). This location may be modified in
.Xr ezjail.conf 5 .
.Pp
See also
.Nm
.Cm update
to install the base jail from source, as well as a method to update
the base jail using
.Xr freebsd-update 8 .
.Pp
The following options are available:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl m
Fetch and install man pages (ca. 10MB).
.It Fl M
Fetch and install man pages, without (re)installing the base jail. May be used
to add the man pages to the base jail after the initial installation.
.It Fl s
Fetch and install sources (ca. 450MB).
.It Fl S
Fetch and install sources, without (re)installing the base jail.
.It Fl p
Invoke the
.Xr portsnap 8
utility to fetch and extract a FreeBSD ports tree from
.Li portsnap.FreeBSD.org
(ca. 475MB). When a ports tree is added to the base jail, a modified
.Pa make.conf
containing reasonable values to function in the jailed environment is added to
the new jail template so all jails created from the new jail template will
have a working ports environment. See the appendix 
.%B Using Portsnap
in the
.%B FreeBSD Handbook
for details or
.Xr portsnap 8 .
.It Fl P
Fetch and extract a ports tree, without (re)installing the base jail.
.It Fl h Ar host
Set the remote host to fetch FreeBSD distribution sets from. If absent the
default host
.Li ftp.FreeBSD.org
is used. Variable:
.Dq Li $ezjail_ftphost .
.Pp
It is possible to install from the 
.Li disc1
CDRom, or an extracted -RELEASE directory, by specifying the
.Ar host
argument as
.Pa file://path/to/source .
.It Fl r Ar release
Install this release of FreeBSD in the base jail, instead of the version
returned by
.Dq Li uname -r
on the host system. Note that the FreeBSD FTP servers usually provide only
-RELEASE versions, not -STABLE nor -CURRENT versions; you will be prompted for
confirmation when trying to install a non -RELEASE version. If you want to
install a -CURRENT version, you may have to compile from source the base jail;
see the
.Nm Cm update
sub-command for this.
.El
.Ss Nm Cm create
Create a new jail inside ezjail's scope. It either copies the new jail 
directory tree template or an ezjail archive directory tree to new jail root
directory,
.Pa /usr/jails/ Ns Ar jailname
by default. Jailname and IP address are mandatory parameters.
.Pp
When a new jail is created, a corresponding new
.Pa /etc/fstab. Ns Ar jailname
file is also created, with a 
.Xr nullfs 5
mount giving access to the base jail from the new jail.
.Pp
The following operands are mandatory:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Ar jailname
The name of the jail. It is customary to use the network name of the jail,
such as
.Dq Li jail1.example.com
(or maybe simply
.Dq Li jail1 ) ,
but really any name may be used.
.Pp
It is an error to have several jails of the same name, note that due to
ezjail's internal jailname sanitation,
.Dq Li sand-box.com
and
.Dq Li sand_box_com
are considered identical. Some names such as
.Dq Li basejail
and
.Dq Li flavours
are reserved for ezjails internal administrative purposes.
.It Ar ipaddress Ns Op Ar ,ipaddress2,...
The IP address or addresses of the jail. Since FreeBSD 7.2, it is possible to
assign several several IPv4 or IPv6 addresses to a jail, by separating them
with commas. Previous versions of FreeBSD allowed only a single IPv4 address
per jail.
.Pp
The addresses of the jail are not configured on the host.
.Nm
will display a warning if the requested address is not found on any interface,
and the jail will probably not start.
.Pp
It is common to bind jails to loopback addresses, so they provide services
visible to other jails only. 
.El
.Pp
The following options are available:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl r Ar jailroot
Use this name as the directory name of the new jail. Without this option, it
is derived from the jail's name. If this option is given and does not start
with a '/', it is interpreted as relative to ezjail's root directory
.Pa (/usr/jails
by default). If a specified jailroot path lies outside the ezjail root
directory, a soft link is created inside
.Pa /usr/jails/
pointing to the location of the newly created jail.
.It Fl a Ar archive
Restore a jail from an archive created with
.Nm Cm archive .
The archive files are kept in
.Pa /usr/jails/ezjail_archives
by default. Use
.Pa -
to restore an archive from the standard input.
.Pp
You will probably need to tidy up things inside an ezjail if you migrate it
between different ezjail environments. This may include (but is not limited
to) reinstalling ports or packages for different CPUs or library versions. You
may also need to copy some libraries from the source host's base jail.
.Pp
See also
.Nm Cm restore ,
if you only want to revert to an old jail's state from an archive on the same
release version.
.It Fl x
This flag indicates that a jail root directory for that jail already exists.
In this case, ezjail will only import the jail to its control directory. Sanity
checks are performed.
.It Fl f Ar flavour
Install the requested
.Ar flavour
in the new jail. Refer to
.Xr ezjail 7
for more details on flavours.
.Pp
This option may not be used with the
.Fl a
option.
.It Fl c Cm simple | bde | eli | zfs
Create an image jail of the given type.
.Pp
.Cm simple, bde No and Cm eli
image jails are file backed memory discs attached as
.Xr md 4
devices, so the jail can never grow beyond its allocated size and can
even be mounted read only. The jail will be stored in a file named
.Ar jailname Ns Pa .img ,
unless
.Fl r Ar jailroot
is given, in which case the jail is stored in
.Ar jailroot Ns Pa .img .
.Pp
Both
.Cm bde No and Cm eli
jails use the
.Xr geom 4
framework to encrypt all data written to the image file using
.Xr gbde 4
(for
.Cm bde )
or
.Xr geli 8
(for
.Cm eli ) .
.Pp
Unless you pass some options to the encryption geom commands using the
.Fl C
parameter, you will be prompted for a passphrase to protect the crypto
image. Note that, since starting normal encrypted image jails requires user
interaction to enter the passphrase, they will
.Cm NOT automatically be started at boot time. No Use
.Cm ezjail-admin startcrypto No to manually start all crypto image jails.
.Pp
A
.Cm zfs
jail is backed with a
.Xr zfs 8
filesystem, whose initial quota is given with the
.Fl s
option. The filesystem is created in the
.Dq Li $ezjail_jailzfs
parent filesystem and by default compressed using the lzjb method, as set in
the
.Dq Li ezjail_zfs_jail_properies
variable, both values configured in
.Xr ezjail.conf 5
.Pp
In each case, the
.Fl s
flag is mandatory when creating such a jail. An empty directory (without the
.Pa .img
suffix in the case of file-based jails) will be created and used as a mount
point when running the jail.
.It Fl s Ar imagesize
Allocate this size to the jail. Without an unit, the size is in bytes. The
valid suffix values are b/B for blocks (i. e. 512 bytes), k/K for kilobytes,
m/M for megabytes, and g/G for gigabytes. As a reference point, a newly
created jail requires 2 MB.
.Pp
It is not possible to increase the size of file-based jails after their
creation, short of creating a new image jail with a larger size.
.It Fl C Ar imageopt
Pass this argument to
.Xr gbde 8
or
.Xr geli 8
when initialising crypto image jails. The
.Fl P No and Fl K
(and
.Fl L
for
.Xr gbde 4 )
options will be translated and passed to the respective attach command when
starting the jail. You will have to escape parameters with single ticks to
protect them from shell expansion.
.It Fl i
Synonym of
.Fl c Cm simple .
.It Fl b
Tell ezjail that starting this jail would block unattended reboots. This may
happen when certain services need private SSL keys that require the user to
interactively enter a passphrase. The jail is then not automatically started
at boot time.
.El
.Ss Nm Cm console
Attach your console to the selected jail. You are logged in as root by 
default.
.Pp
The following options are available:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl f
Start the jail if it is not running yet.
.It Fl e Ar command
Use
.Ar command
instead of the default
.Dq /usr/bin/login -f root .
loogin command. A one time change to use a different user can be
accomplished by using
.Fl e Qq Li /usr/bin/login -f user .
Variable:
.Dq Li $ezjail_default_execute .
.El
.Ss Nm Cm list
List all jails inside ezjail's scope. They are sorted by the order they start
up, as defined by
.Xr rcorder 1 .
.Pp
The first column is the status flag consisting of 2 or 3 letters. The first
letter is the type of jail:
.Bl -tag -width 4n -offset indent -compact
.It Sy D
Directory tree based jail.
.It Sy I
File-based jail.
.It Sy E
Geli encrypted file-based jail.
.It Sy B
Bde encrypted file-based jail.
.It Sy Z
ZFS filesystem-based jail.
.El
.Pp
The second letter is the status of the jail:
.Bl -tag -width 4n -offset indent -compact
.It Sy R
The jail is running.
.It Sy A
The image of the jail is mounted, but the jail is not running.
.It Sy S
The jail is stopped.
.El
.Pp
If present, the third letter,
.Sy N ,
means that the jail is not automatically started.
.Pp
The following columns are the JID (when it is running), the IP addresses, the name and the full path directory name of the jail.
.Ss Nm Cm start | restart | stop | startcrypto Op Ar jailname ...
.Pp
This is a shortcut to the
.Xr rc 8
.Cm ezjail.sh
script. Refer to
.Xr ezjail 7
section
.Pa Starting jails
for details.
.Pp
Note that, if ezjail is not enabled in
.Xr rc.conf 5
with
.Dq Li ezjail_enable= Ns Qq Li YES ,
nothing happens. 
.Pp
Since starting crypto image jails requires interaction with the administrator, they are not run at
boot time. Use
.Cm startcrypto No to run them all at once.
.Ss Nm Cm config Ar jailname
Manage parameters of specific ezjails. For running jails, most of the
configuration changes described below will not be applied until the next time
the jail is restarted.
.Pp
The following options are available:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl r Cm run | norun
Set the jail to be automatically started or not on boot.
.It Fl n Ar newname
Rename the jail. Unless a custom root directory was given with the
.Fl r
flag when creating the jail, the root directory will be renamed as well. A
running jail may not be renamed.
.It Fl i Cm attach | detach | fsck
Only valid for stopped image jails. Attaching a jail means making the content
of the root of the jail accessible from the host. No other sub-commands will
function on an jail while its image is attached. With
.Cm fsck ,
the image jail is attached,
.Xr fsck 8
is run, then the image jail is detached. You can only fsck image based jails.
.It Fl z Ar newdataset
Set the given ZFS dataset to be mounted inside the jail file system
when it is started.
.It Fl f Ar newfib
Change the FIB of the jail (see
.Xr setfib 2 ) .
.It Fl c Ar newcpuset
Change the CPU affinity set of the jail (see
.Xr cpuset 2 ) .
.El
.Ss Nm Cm delete Ar jailname
Delete a jail. By default, this command only deletes ezjail's control file for
the selected jail as well as
.Pa /etc/fstab. Ns Ar jailname .
The
.Pa /usr/jails/ Ns Ar jailname
directory is not deleted.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl f
Stop the jail before deleting it.
.It Fl w
Delete the directory or the file backing the jail.
.El
.Ss Nm Cm archive Op jailname
Create a backup of one or all jails. The jail's root directory tree is backed
up as a
.Xr pax 1
archive. By default, the jail needs to be stopped.
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl A
Archive all jails. You must neither specify an archivename nor a jailname in
this case.
.It Fl a Ar archivename
Use this name for the archive file. If absent, the archive file name is
derived from the jail name, with the current date and time appended to the
archive's file name. Use
.Pa -
to write to stdout.
.It Fl d Ar directory
Save the archive in this directory. If this option is not given and
.Dq Li $ezjail_archivedir
is not set, the archive is saved in the default directory.
Variable:
.Dq Li $ezjail_archivedir .
.It Fl f
Archive the jail even when it is running.
.El
.Pp
Use
.Nm Cm restore
or
.Nm Cm create Fl a Ar archive
to restore an archive.
.Ss Nm Cm restore
Create new ezjails from archived versions. It tries to collect all
information necessary to do that without user interaction from the
user.
.Pp
The following operand is mandatory:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Ar archive | jailname
Restore this jail. If only the jail name is given,
.Nm
will use the most recent archive file matching the name you specified.
To restore an older version, specify the complete archive file name
(file name with the date and time of the archive appended to it).
.El
.Pp
The following options are available:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl d Ar archivedir
Search the archive file in this directory. If this option is not given, the
archive is searched in
.Dq Li $ezjail_archivedir .
.It Fl f
Restore the archive even if running on a host different from
where it was archived. Be default,
.Nm
will refuse to restore an archive if the archived host system's hostname,
its FreeBSD version or CPU architecture do not match the current host.
.El
.Ss Nm Cm update
Updates ezjail's basejail, or in the
.Fl b
or
.Fl i
case, install a FreeBSD world from source to be used as basejail.
.Pp
Exactly one of the following operand must be specified:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl b
Build a world from source and install it as the (updated) basejail.
.Dq make buildworld ; make installworld
by default using the sources located at 
.Pa /usr/src
(but see the
.Fl s
option).
.Pp
As the old basejail is not deleted, but merely overwritten, this usually
leaves all jails in a state where they still find older versions of libraries
they were linked against.
.It Fl i
As above but only perform a
.Dq make installworld ,
assuming the world has already been built. That is highly likely since it is
recommended to update the basejail along with the host system.
.It Fl u
Use
.Xr freebsd-update 8
to update the basejail. Note that as 
.Xr freebsd-update 8
uses
.Dq Li uname -r
to determine the currently running system, the base jail and the host
need to be updated at the same time, without rebooting on the new
kernel in the meantime.
.It Fl U
Use
.Xr freebsd-update 8
to upgrade the basejail to the hosts operating system version, or a version
you may pass freebsd-update's call to
.Dq uname -r
via the
.Pa UNAME_r
environment variable. Since there currently is no way of infering the
osversion currently installed in the basejail, you need to remember the
original osversion and pass it to this script using the
.Fl s
option.
.It Fl P
Install only the ports tree, assuming the basejail has already been
created. This can be done while jails are running. The
.Xr portsnap 8
utility is invoked to do the actual work.
.El
.Pp
The following options are available:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl p
Give the new basejail a copy of FreeBSD's ports tree. The
.Xr portsnap 8
utility is invoked to do the actual work.
.It Fl s Ar sourcedir | sourceosversion
In the
.Fl b No and Fl i No case: Use the sources in
.Ar sourcedir
instead of
.Pa /usr/src .
Variable:
.Dq Li $ezjail_sourcetree .
.Pp
In the
.Fl U No case: Pass this release tag to
.Xr freebsd-update 8
as the source OS version of the basejail.
.El
.Pp
See the
.Cm install
sub command to install the basejail from binary packages.
.Pp
If the basejail is managed in its own ZFS filesystem, a snapshot of that
filesystem is taken first.
.Sh FILES
.Pa EZJAIL_PREFIX/bin/ezjail-admin
.br
.Pa EZJAIL_PREFIX/etc/rc.d/ezjail.sh
.br
.Pa EZJAIL_PREFIX/etc/ezjail.conf
.br
.Pa EZJAIL_PREFIX/share/examples/ezjail/
.br
.Pa EZJAIL_PREFIX/etc/ezjail/*
.br
.Pa /usr/etc/fstab.*
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ezjail 7 ,
.Xr ezjail.conf 8 ,
.Xr jail 8 ,
.Xr devfs 5 ,
.Xr fdescfs 5 ,
.Xr procfs 5 ,
.Xr portsnap 8 .
.Sh AUTHOR
.An Dirk Engling 
.Aq erdgeist@erdgeist.org .
